---
title: 'Learning and Sharing at Armakuni'
description: At the beginning of April (2017), I became a permanent employee at Armakuni. I had been contracting with the company part-time for a while…
featured_image: '/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/featured-image.jpeg'
---

At the beginning of April (2017), I became a permanent employee at
[Armakuni](https://www.armakuni.com/). I had been contracting with the company
part-time for a while already, but they were growing and asked me to join
full-time. This was a very exciting opportunity, not least because they were
(and still are) making an effort to hire highly skilled engineers, and being
surrounded by people like that is one of the best places to learn. However, due
to high demand, most engineers were out on site with clients full-time so we
rarely had time together to learn, share and practice. Feeling a little
frustrated by this situation, I proposed that we should start a fortnightly
internal meetup where we could have talks, discussions and workshops. For every
other Monday evening since this is what we have done.

### The Format

For the first few meetups, we didn’t define a structure — my hope was that it
would start to self-organise and we would collectively own the running of the
events. This didn’t play out as I had hoped, and it was clear that some effort
>was required to get the most from the events. So, from September onwards, we
>defined the structure for each event.

The standard structure for a meetup event looks something like this:

* at 7pm there is time for some [lightning talks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightning_talk)
* around 7:30 we either have some open discussion, a supporting talk or we start the main session if it’s a longer one.
* by 8pm, the pizza is finished and we started the main session (if it has not already started)

### Lightning Talks

Right from the beginning, we decided that the content of sessions should not be
limited to things which are relevant to our day to day jobs, but they should
also include all things that excite and inspire us. As a group of passionate
software engineers, these topics are often still tech related — but not always.

So far, lightning talks have covered a very broad range of things including
pairing, testing, containers, innovations in current projects, fencing (the
sword variety), Palinka, and more.

<div class="gallery" data-columns="3">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo1.jpeg">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo2.jpeg">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo3.jpeg">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo4.jpeg">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo5.jpeg">
	<img src="/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/photo6.jpeg">
</div>


### The Sessions

The types of sessions we have had for our main events are quite varied. Some
are hands-on and some are presentations, but all of them have been met with a
high level of engagement and enthusiasm.

As a brief summary, this is what we have done in the last few months.

#### Building Fast Pipelines with Confidence

This is a talk I’ve been working on. The talk shows how it’s possible to build
fast deployment pipelines which give you the confidence to continuously deploy.
It shows that in order to do this you don’t just have to think about how you
architect your tests, but also your software, teams and culture.

#### Value Stream Mapping

[Value Stream Mapping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_stream_mapping) has
become one of Armakuni’s key tools. It provides a very clear and visual
understanding of how processes are performing and being improved. For most of
us, this was a new tool which we had not used before. During this session,
Alison did a presentation while drawing at the whiteboard and answering our
questions.

#### Raspberry Pi Automation

This session was about having fun and trying something different. Adrian
provided us with some Raspberry Pis and a number of external components (LEDs,
stepper motors, piezoelectric speakers). We spent the session connecting these
up and learning to control them with different libraries in and languages
(Python, BASH and Go).

![Hacking Raspberry Pis](/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/pi-session.jpeg)

#### Testing Architecture with Spring Boot

Ben has been developing a developer training course for one of our clients. The
course includes a section on architecting and building software using BDD and
TDD. Ben presented a first draft of the hands-on part of this course as a live
coding demonstration. At the end, feedback was provided which Ben took back to
improve the course.

#### An Introduction to Elm

I have a personal interest in statically typed functional programming
languages, so running a workshop to introduce everyone to
[Elm](http://elm-lang.org/)  was an effort to try and trick some of my
colleagues into getting an interest so we can talk about it over lunch.

For the workshop, we built a small UI for building a custom pizza. Elm is a
fantastic frontend language and now that we have had that introduction, I hope it might be considered in a future project.

#### Coding Kata

Bence introduced us to coding kata he had come across. The aim is to build a
program which takes a string of input instructions and outputs a rendered
bitmap. We did that is a solo coding exercise and then compare approach at the end of the session.

#### Object Calisthenics

For this session, we tackled the [Bank Account
Kata](https://github.com/sandromancuso/Bank-kata) while trying to completely
obey the 9 rules of [Object
Calisthenics](http://williamdurand.fr/2013/06/03/object-calisthenics/). We did
this in pairs and again, had a retro at the end to compare our approaches in
different languages. This was actually the first time I had done this exercise
in a dynamically typed language (Ruby) which turned out to be very interesting.

### Conclusion

Sharing interests and doing deliberate learning with your colleagues makes the
difference between having a good job and having a great job — especially when
you work with amazing, talented engineers. To have the opportunity to spend
time with my fantastic colleagues at Armakuni is both a pleasure and a
privilege.

Looking back over this short time, I hope that those who attended have learnt
some valuable things. There were many new things I have taken away from these
sessions. I was originally fearful that if I dictated too much how the meetups
would be run that it wouldn’t be the group owned event that I had originally
hoped for — but after a few months I learnt that it was OK, and even necessary,
to own that role (until hopefully one day, someone else will want to take my
place). This was a very valuable lesson which I have taken away from these
sessions.

Going forward I think we can refine our events further (we definitely need to 
allocate more time to coding sessions) and I’m sure there will be so many more
exciting things to take place events in 2018.

![Pizza is also important](/images/learning-and-sharing-at-armakuni/pizza.jpeg)
